---
id: "0EBB35"
date: "2018-11-16T15:50:00.000Z"
title: "Welcome to the suck"
description: "Being trans is awesome, except when it isn't."
slug: trans-negatives
draft: true
noimages: true
tags:
  - Transgender
  - Essays
titlecard: center
---

Now that I've [written about my favorite things](/p/trans-positives), it's only fair to write about the parts that really suck about being a trans woman. This article is written with the assumption that the reader is cisgender and knows nothing about trans matters, so if you are trans or know trans people, some of this is gonna be extra expository. Also, a lot of this falls into the category of just what it means to be a woman, which I'll get to in the end.

Lets start with the obvious.

### Men

I am now terrified of strange men, especially straight men. Least of all because I no longer have the physical strength to defend myself from an assault, but all the more so because they are so unpredictable towards women, especially trans women. Straight cis male culture is so rich with homophobia and toxic masculinity that just being recognized as trans (clocked, as we call it) puts us in a lot of danger. This danger gets even more severe if men find you attractive, because then they think you're trying to "trick" them into being gay (newsflash dudes, if you're attracted to a cis passing trans woman, it's not gay). Getting stuck in a room alone with a strange man, such as an elevator, is an anxiety inducing experience. Every single trans woman that was murdered in the United States over the last year died at the hands of a man. Trans women get killed simply for making straight men horny, and in many parts of the country that is actually a valid legal excuse for their murder. Thankfully, California is one of two states that has forbidden that defense, but it's not like the law protects our lives.

Far too many men have no sense of decorum when it comes to admiring women. A little bit of looking at my breasts is validating – I worked very hard for my boobs, I like to show them off, and I enjoy people admiring them – but too much of that gets creepy, and some guys just straight up leer at women. Men, if you think we don't notice this because we aren't looking directly at you, you're a fool. We know when we're being stared at, even when you're trying to be discrete. Even those little eye darts when you're having a conversation are obvious as hell (tho I can't judge too hard, I do it too). It becomes a complex, because I want to wear low cut tops out of enjoyment of my own body, but then find myself wanting to cover them up just because of the men around me. Mercifully I have not yet experienced cat calling, but that's because I'm fat and thus not deemed as desirable, so it's kind of a mixed blessing.

Then there is the direct misogyny. Men talk over me now, cut me out of conversations, and then get indignant when I take back control of the dialog using their own techniques. I particularly have this problem with my doctor, who has treated me increasingly like a novelty of female intelligence.  There's also a thing where I will relate my own personal lived experience as a trans woman, and then men will tell me that I'm wrong. That one is always fun. I've seen an increase in road rage from men, as well, and over the most silly of things. One guy spent a mile glaring at me in his rear view mirror because I dared to try to merge in front of him instead of behind him (never mind that my lane was ending and I didn't have a choice about who was where). Men are less likely to yield to me at four way stops, even if I have the right of way.

Sorry guys, but you're guilty until proven tolerable. I thank god that I'm a lesbian, my heart really feels for my straight trans sisters who have to navigate this threat while trying to find romance.

### TERFs, Ray Blanchard, and Autogynephelia

If you don't know the term, TERF stands for Trans Exclusionary Radical Feminist, but the term isn't really appropriate any more, as most TERFs are decidedly not feminist. These are mostly white cis women who take a stance that trans people (tho, mostly trans women) do not deserve the right to be included in gendered spaces (especially women's spaces) because they are not actually that gender. In short, they say trans women are not women, even tho we look and act like women, and trans men are traitors to woman kind. Historically these have largely been second wave feminist lesbians who saw trans women as men trying to trick gay women (in the same way straight men think we're trying to trick them), but TERF ideology has since been co-opted by right wing evangelical christian groups.

TERFs latch on to the theories of Ray Blanchard, PHD, who concocted [a topology of trans identities](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blanchard%27s_transsexualism_typology) and his own theories for why trans women are the way they are, which all boil down to reducing us to our sexual orientations. I'm not going to go into the details here, but Blanchard basically says that any trans women who are attracted to women are autogynephiles – men who fetishize women to the point of wanting to look like the objects of our obsession. Julia Sorano has done a marvelous job of [deconstructing the myth of autogynephelia](http://juliaserano.blogspot.com/2018/03/autogynephilia-theory-that-ignores_10.html), so I wont bother. TERFs, however, _love_ this bullshit, they lap it up like cream, and Blanchard's garbage continues to be peddled as if it were legitimate, even tho mainstream psychology has completely invalidated it as hokum. Blanchard himself continues to make a lot of money off these people, who pay him to speak at events.

Beyond the obvious demoralizing factors of these groups simply existing, there are two things here that really suck about this, as a trans person...  TERFs have mastered the art of spreading their filth in the form of innocent doubts and [concern trolling](http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Concern_troll), using dialog designed to convince those ignorant of trans matters to be opposed to trans people. Because of this, I can never be sure if someone I've just met is going to have TERFy views about my existence, which make disclosure of my transness extremely risky. For example, my daughter started kindergarten this year, and my wife has become very involved in school functions. We have to be careful about who among the other parents, as well as people in our neighborhood, that we associate with on any deeper of a level than acquaintances. Even people who are friendly to gay families have the potential to become hostile if they learn that I am transgender.

These people are also the backing force of the vast majority of anti-trans initiatives that spring up in legislature around the globe. Their ideology is so deeply rooted in the idea that trans women are all sexual deviants that they believe we're a threat to other women. Here's a fact, there has _never_ been a reported incident of a trans woman assaulting someone in a bathroom. No where in the world has this happened, and you can bet that if it had happened there would be a _ton_ of media coverage around it. There's been ***many*** cases of transphobes attacking trans women in bathrooms, however, which I will get to next.

The second issue is with autogynephelia (AGP) itself. I first learned of AGP when I was a teenager just trying to understand who and what I was, and I internalized it as truth. That single concept kept me in the closet for most of my life, because I became convinced I just had a weird fetish, and fetishes had to be hidden. Still to this day I feel twinges of shame and invalidation whenever I experience body euphoria, because those ideas became so deeply ingrained in my subconscious. This makes body positivity into a double edged sword, because if I become too happy with myself, or start to see myself as a sexual entity, then a little voice in the back of my head says "you're just a pervert", and everything falls apart.

### Bathrooms

As I write this I am 18 months and ten days into my medical transition. For all intents and purposes I am cis passing (meaning people assume I am a cisgender woman), and I have been for more than six months. In spite of this, I still experience significant anxiety when using public restrooms. What if there's some tell that gives me away as being trans, what if some transphobic TERF confronts me while I'm waiting for a stall or washing my hands? What if someone talks to me and my voice falters? It's terrifying! It doesn't stop me from using the bathrooms, because I girl has to pee, but it means I spend more time in the stall than I sometimes need to while I wait for a break in foot traffic.

### Doctors

It is _scary_ how poorly doctors understand basic endocrinology and how hormone therapy works. Like, _really_ scary. Far too many MDs treat HRT like it's some kind of voodoo medicine that's just as likely to kill you as help you. Because of this, many trans people really struggle to get the medications they need to actually see a major shift in physical appearance. Even if you can find a doctor willing to prescribe at all, many times they are extremely conservative with their prescribing doses, aiming only for 50th percentile of cis levels for men and women. This is woefully inadequate for correcting decades of running on the wrong hormone. They're also hesitant to prescribe secondary hormones, such as progesterone, which is a critical part of the female endocrine cycle. I've been fortunate enough to have a doctor that listens to my evidence and begrudgingly grants my requests (after talking over me to explain why he doesn't like it).

This is further exacerbated by a number of studies conducted in the 80s and 90s which showed that ethyl-estradiol and progestins caused thrombotic events (blood clots). Modern trans therapy doesn't use either of those drugs, favoring biosynthetic estradiol and progesterone, but people don't know the difference, so the misinformation abounds. Surgeons require trans women stop taking their estrogen before they're willing to work on them because they think the patient has a higher risk of blood clots (hint, it's actually the same risk as cis women), and don't recognize just how traumatic peri-menopause can be for a woman to be going through during surgery recovery. Thankfully, the one surgery I've had did not make this requirement of me. I'm not sure I would have complied if they had.

Then there's a lovely trope called Trans Broken Leg Syndrome, where you'll go to a doctor for something completely unrelated to your transition (eg, tendentious, or a bronchial infection) and once learning you're on HRT, the doctor becomes convinced that this is the source of what ails you and isn't willing to investigate more likely scenarios. I've heard of trans folks who have had life threatening illnesses overlooked because the doctor wouldn't look beyond their medications. I worry about this any time I have to go to urgent care.

The reality is, hormones are hormones. There is nothing magical about them, they don't make the body act any differently than the bodies of cisgender people running on the same hormones naturally. After 20 months on HRT, my body is functionally identical to any woman who has had a hysterectomy, aside from some soft tissue configuration differences. I don't even have a proper prostate any more, it's shrunk back down into a skene's gland. My breast cancer risk is no worse than it is for any other woman. But good luck getting doctors to understand that.

### Losing others

Coming out as transgender instantly segregated me from a lot of my long time relationships. My mother still to this day refuses to call me Jocelyn and frequently misgenders me. At my insistence that this had to stop, she now just doesn't acknowledge me in public at all and hasn't said my name in my presence in over a year. Because of this I never go anywhere with her, and I've stopped engaging in conversations.  Once word got around that I was trans, all of my former friends who are Jehovah's Witnesses just vanished. Literally... I never even see them around town any more. This doesn't stop me from being extremely nervous any time I go into a restaurant here in town, worried that I'm going to bump into one of them and have an extremely awkward conversation.

Even my best friend, my best man at my wedding, and roommate of three years, has now told me he never wants to see me again. This is the cost of being yourself, and I've had it easy. That said, I've also made WAY more new friends since starting my transition, many of whom would (and have) dropped everything to help me in a moment of need. I've also learned who among my pre-transition friends are truly good people. Most of our immediate social circle didn't even bat an eye when I came out and switched names & pronouns with little struggle.

My relationships with everyone in my life has changed; co-workers treat me differently, the women in my life have drawn much closer, the men have grown more distant, but no relationship changed anywhere near as much as between me and my wife. In all ways we are more connected and have a better understanding of each other than we ever had before, our love has grown ten times, but along the way we went through some very rough times, and some things were lost along the way. I desperately miss being able to show affection for my wife while we're in public, but even here in California there's still a lot of social stigma around homosexual relationships. We've had cashiers ask us if we're related because they see two women with kids who both act in motherly capacity, and it doesn't even occur to them to think we're a couple. We're afraid to hold hands in public, or even touch each other affectionately, lest others give us grief for it. Our status as a couple has been damaged, and that infuriates me.


That's enough seriousness, how about something light hearted...

### Brasome

AFABs reading this are probably already nodding your heads, because you know. Especially if you're a bigger person, or especially large chested.

I _love_ lingerie, and bras most of all. A modern underwire bra encompasses a century of structural engineering in cloth. Every stitch, every panel, every bit of elastic, wire and lace, all carefully engineered to manipulate one of society's favorite targets of attention. The perfect bra can make a woman's breasts look extraordinary while supporting and relieving a literal weight on her chest. The problem is that every woman's breasts are different, and unless you fit the exact mainstream archetype for breast shape, finding that perfect fit is an exercise in futility. Especially if you're a woman who didn't hit puberty until her late 30s. **Preface, the things I describe here mostly affect trans women who transitioned later in life.** They're less issues for women who transitioned younger than 25.

I have a 42" underbust (circumference measuring under my beasts along my breastbone) and a 53" overbust (circumference at the largest part of my breasts). Using conventional sizing methods, this puts me in a 42J cup. If you've seen me, your first thought is probable "Jocelyn, your boobs are not that big". You're right, they aren't.

Most late-blooming trans women have wide roots (meaning the base of our breasts are far apart) thanks to larger rib cages and the effects of male puberty, which means our breasts tend to point outward as they develop. Mine are no exception, and it's further exacerbated by my obesity; fatty tissue deposits in my chest stretched the skin out horizontally, giving me a lot of side fat. That fat has since migrated away from the area, but left loose skin for my breasts to grow into. This means that I need bras which push inwards from the sides towards the center, something that many women want to avoid (the dreaded mono-boob), so finding bras that do this is difficult. For most bra brands, this means plunge bras. Additionally, all the side fat means I've got a very large base. The underwire length and shape is derived from the cup size, and I effectively have a G cup base.

Another common problem for late-transitioning trans women is shallow breasts, especially in the first five years. I literally have the boobs of a 12-14 year old, they're just not filled out on top. There's a number of factors contributing to this... one is simply fat distribution, adult women have a lot of fat stored in their breasts. That will improve over time as fat cycles within the body (this is heavily influenced by progesterone, which is one reason I'm such a proponent of its use in trans care). Another reason is because we don't have the benefit of the loads of human growth hormone that teenagers have, a very important reason for why trans kids need to be allowed to go through the correct puberty during adolescence. Breasts take 5-6 years to fully mature, and continue to grow in small spurts after that.

The result is that I have a lot of forward projection, but very little tissue to fill up that space, so my actual cup size is realistically closer to a DD or DDD depending on where I am in my period cycle. Like 88% of women, my breasts are also different sizes; my right breast is about a cup and a half larger, which almost no bra company caters to (shocking, given that 88% statistic). Remember what I said about underwire shape? If I wear a 42DDD bra, the underwire slips forward and digs into the side of my chest. If I wear a 42G, then the top of the cup is so empty that my breasts look concave, and if the cup is molded then it tends to collapse into the empty space. Push up bras help, but still tend to have a lot of empty room in the top of the cup.

So lets tally that up: Wide set, large base, shallow depth. Last time I went to Lane Bryant for bras I spent an hour in the store, tried on at least a dozen different bras, and the one I finally took home hurts to wear. That's bra shopping in a nutshell.

### Is it cold in here?

That thing about women always being cold? Yeah, it's biologically a fact, women have warmer cores but colder extremities compared to men. That makes us more susceptible to temperature changes. I'm now either always cold or suddenly too hot. This is especially true in offices, which systemically [tend to be cold for the sake of the men](https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/28/nyregion/office-temperature-sexist-nixon-cuomo.html). I cannot count how many times I've forgotten to bring a sweater with me to work and ended up freezing through the day. Our office bathrooms are also suspiciously refrigerated...

### When did this get so heavy?

Testosterone naturally encourages the building of extra muscle, even in people who don't exercise much. This is one of the attributes that gives men their upper body shape. Switching from testosterone to estrogen means losing all that muscle mass, which for trans women is a good thing because it makes us look more feminine. The downside is, of course, losing all that strength. Jars have become so much harder to open, and every time I buy a 32 pack of water bottles it's heavier than it was last time. I can barely lift my children now, and that's not just because they keep getting bigger.

Everything has become so much harder now, and what _really_ sucks is the people who don't understand this, like my in-laws and my mother. I still get called upon to do the heavy manual labor that they need, which frankly I just can't do alone any more, and which also ends up feeling invalidating. It's never "can you two come help me with this", meaning me AND my wife, it's always "can Jocelyn come do this?" It's yet another reminder that in their eyes I'm still a man.

### Unsafe safe spaces

The queer community is simultaneously the most loving and welcoming family to become part of, and also the most likely to stab you in the back and/or make you feel very unwanted. In general, queer people tend to be much more aware of social justice issues. Queer spaces are very aware of the need for safe spaces and protecting individuals from harm. At times, however, this can cause harm in and of itself. Word a sentence improperly, use the wrong word, or even just fail to recognize an issue, and you suddenly find yourself facing a firing squad. I myself have been chased out of online spaces because I got too comfortable in a conversation and accidentally said something ableist, or didn't put enough conditions on my statements to avoid generalizing a group that it didn't apply to.

I'm not talking about bigotry here, either, I'm not talking about "civility" or a lack of political correctness. I'm talking about a lack of forgiveness for mistakes in discourse, and an over abundance of pedantry within social justice.

For example, I once accidentally misgendered a trans guy who was asking questions about trans-feminine HRT. I didn't even properly misgender him, I just accidentally assumed he was inquiring for himself.  I didn't know he was a man, and he didn't have pronouns in his profile, but I still was at fault for misreading the conversation. Once it was pointed out, I apologized profusely, but it didn't matter. I was harassed for the misdeed until I left the space.

This was not the only time this happened to me, I'm far from the only one I've seen it happen to, and it keeps happening time and again. It's practically a caricature of liberalist stereotypes and PC culture. Some spaces are worse than others, and they gain reputations for it, but now I've gotten to the point where I don't seek out mixed queer spaces for conversation. It's just too exhausting to always be on alert against making mistakes.  Instead I stick to womens spaces, which tend to be much more forgiving of mistakes and understand that online discussions are often succinct for the sake of discourse.

### Performative Femininity and Queer Stigmas

I love fashion, I love dresses, I love color & pattern matching, layering, and assembling complimentary outfits. However, I hate pants, suits, blazers, and just about anything on the butch side of the presentation spectrum. I'd rather rare a leggings or a skirt than jeans or shorts. I also love doing makeup, both as an art form and as an activity. Basically what I'm saying is, I am femme as fuck, and I love having any excuse to get dolled up, be it an appointment with my therapist, having lunch with friends, or even just going to the office. But there's problems with that.

Historically, thanks to the Harry Benjamin rules of transition, trans women were _required_ to be hyper feminine in order to get care. Those rules were obsolesced by the WPATH Standards of Care, and that is a big part of why there are now suddenly _so many more trans people_ in the last seven years, but those attitudes still remain in some trans communities.  You run into conflicting sides of a multifaceted debate over how trans women should present themselves.

Many trans women go through what we refer to as the "princess phase", where we basically shop like teenage girls and end up buying things wildly inappropriate for our age and/or bodies. It's part pressure release (finally being able to shop for the things we've always wanted to wear), part catharsis (trying to make up for lost girlhood), and part not having a well rounded understanding of how to dress ourselves. Most trans women understand that this is something we grow out of and it's just an aspect of second puberty, but others push hard against that because they feel it feeds into trans woman stereotypes, especially surrounding AGP. There's also push from feminist circles for women to not be overtly feminine, as it tends to make men take women less seriously. At the same time, other parts of feminism say "to hell with men think, dress how you like", which then bumps heads with another side of trans discourse that says "If you want people to believe you're a woman you have to act the part." _That_ then butts heads against butch leaning women (both cis and trans) who are angry that their presentation is a factor in the validity of their womanhood. Historically there has also been a bit of femmephobia within lesbian circles, with the term "Lipstick Lesbian" used as an epitaph, and a counter movement to reclaim that term. Finally you throw drag queens and the frequent cisgender confusion of how drag and transness differ, and you end up with a gigantic existential mess of invalidation.

All because I like to wear dresses and makeup.

Natalie Wynn covered all of this very well [in one of her videos](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=z1afqR5QkDM).


### Welcome to Womanhood

